early earth might have been purple not
green
there's a theory that ancient microbes
used molecules
other than chlorophyll to absorb
sunlight these molecules likely gave
living organisms
a violet tint
scientists are almost sure that our
planet once had two moons
one of them was a tiny thing no larger
than 750 miles across
unfortunately it crashed into the other
moon
which is now earth's only natural
satellite
until recently there was one more object
orbiting our planet
it was a temporary mini moon called 2020
cd3
this tiny space rock no bigger than
three feet across
was pulled into our orbit more than a
year ago astronomers believe
the mini moon left earth's orbit in
march
from 60 to 100 tons of space dust
drift down to our planet's surface every
day these tiny cosmic particles
are mostly released by comets which are
usually made of dust and ice
when the sun turns this ice into vapor
the remaining dust
travels down to earth if you look at
earth from space
you'll see a blue ocean planet almost 70
percent of its surface is covered with
water
and its average depth is 14 000 feet
but if you gathered all the water into a
sphere
it would be a mere miles across
just barely enough to cover texas and
that's including all the water in the
seas
oceans rivers lakes ice caps groundwater
and even those tiny droplets in the
atmosphere
all earth's air yep all 5140 trillion
tons of it
would make a slightly larger ball by the
way
the further away from the surface the
less dense the atmosphere is
that's why half of earth's air is within
the first three miles above the surface
of the planet
every two hundred thousand to three
hundred thousand years our planet goes
through a magnetic pole reversal
it's not an instant process though it
can last hundreds or even
thousands of years we live
inside the sun its atmosphere stretches
far beyond its visible surface
and even though earth is 93 million
miles away from the star
it's still within the reach of the sun's
atmosphere
auroras happen when charged particles
from the sun
get caught by earth's magnetic field and
crash into the upper atmosphere near the
poles
the hudson bay of canada is a
gravitational anomaly
this area has lower gravity than any
other place on earth
you'd weigh less standing at the equator
than at one of the planet's poles
mars has only 15 percent of earth's
volume and less than 10 percent of its
mass and still the red planet and earth
have almost the same land mass
it's because about two-thirds of our
planet's surface is covered in water
the pacific ocean contains more than
half of the world's free water
it's also by far the largest ocean all
earth's continents could easily fit
into the pacific basin our planet is
gradually slowing down the speed of its
rotation
it happens at an unhurried pace of 17
milliseconds per 100 years
because of this our days are becoming
longer
and still only after 140 million years
the day on earth will last 25 hours
the ocean on jupiter isn't made of water
it's filled with metallic hydrogen
and its depth is a staggering 25 000
miles
that's actually almost the same as the
circumference of earth
a year on mercury is just 88 earth days
long
this planet also has an extremely
squashed orbit
its distance from the sun varies from 28
to 43 million miles
even when you're standing sitting or
lying still you're moving at more than
one thousand miles per hour
that's the speed at which our planet is
spinning through space
at the same time you'd be moving at this
incredible pace
only if you're at the equator pluto's
atmosphere rises much higher above the
surface of the dwarf planet
than let's say the atmosphere of earth
it also has more than 20 layers
all of them are cold and condensed
methane gas
is a byproduct of natural processes and
this very gas is present in the martian
atmosphere
which confuses astronomers to no end
mars produces around 270 tons of methane
per year
scientists can't figure out where the
gas is coming from
earth's southernmost continent
antarctica is only the fifth largest one
but it contains almost 70 percent of the
planet's fresh water
and 90 percent of the world's ice
antarctica is
also considered to be a desert the inner
regions of this continent
get just two inches of precipitation a
year in the form of snow of course
mercury's surface is wrinkled it
happened when the planet's iron core
cooled down
and contracted the wrinkles can reach a
height of one mile
and stretch for hundreds of miles
lots of rocks on earth have a martian
origin
scientists analyzed the chemical content
of some meteorites found in the sahara
desert
antarctica and other places and it
turned out
these rocks had arrived from the red
planet
the only asteroid belt in the solar
system astronomers know about
lies between mars and jupiter there are
thousands of asteroids in this region
but they're extremely widely spaced if
you had to go through that area
the chances of colliding with an
asteroid would be almost non-existent
the four largest asteroids sometimes
called minor planets
contain half the mass of the entire belt
and still the total weight of all the
asteroids there
is a mere four percent of the moon's
weight
mercury is the most cratered planet in
the solar system
its craters are named after famous
musicians artists
and writers the valley called
valles marineris on mars is more than 10
times larger than earth's grand canyon
the origin of this valley puzzles
astronomers
after all mars isn't a planet known for
its active plate tectonics
[Music]
atmospheric pressure on venus is 92
times greater than that on earth
venus also has a much denser atmosphere
that's why
only big meteorites can make it to the
planet's surface
the smaller ones get slowed down and
fall into pieces before reaching the
ground
our planet has its magnetic field thanks
to scorching hot liquid metal that's
flowing inside its outer core
this creates electric currents and they
in turn
generate the magnetic field for the past
years the planet's magnetic north pole
has moved
northward for about 600 miles these days
it's traveling faster than it used to 40
miles per year
versus 10 miles per year several decades
ago
volcanoes on pluto which are called
cryovolcanoes
spit not lava but ice instead of molten
rock
they erupt water methane and ammonia
[Music]
jupiter's mass is twice greater than the
mass of all the other planets in the
solar system
combined earth is the densest planet in
the solar system
but this density varies depending on the
planet's part
for example the crust is less dense than
the solid metallic core
saturn's upper atmosphere is divided
into layers of clouds
those at the top are made of ammonia ice
then
there are water ice clouds and below
them layers of sulfur
ice and cold hydrogen
uranus rotates on its side the reason
for such an unusual position
could be a powerful ancient collision
but so far
it's just a theory by the way uranus is
the only planet
sitting on its side venus rotates in the
opposite direction to the sun
the reason might be a powerful collision
with an asteroid or another space
object iapetus one of saturn's moons
has an unusual coloring it's two-toned
one of its sides is dark with a slight
reddish shoe while the other
is bright scientists haven't cracked
this mystery yet
jupiter's moon io has hundreds of active
volcanoes on its surface
it's the most volcanically active body
in the entire solar system
the moon is covered in lava lakes and
plains of liquid rock
plumes of sulfur spew up for almost 200
miles
it takes light more than four hours to
travel from the sun to neptune
of all the planets of the solar system
jupiter has the shortest day
it lasts for 9 hours and 55 minutes
such a rapid rotation speed gives the
planet its slightly flattened shape